Update Branch Manager handbook instructions for branch cut activities (#757)
kubernetes/sig-release: release-engineering/role-handbooks/branch-manager.md

  - [Associates Expectations](#associates-expectations)
- [Prerequisite](#prerequisite)
  - [Release Team Onboarding](#release-team-onboarding)
  - [Branch Management Onboarding](#branch-management-onboarding)
  - [Safety Check](#safety-check)
- [The Release Process](#the-release-process)
  - [Alpha Stage](#alpha-stage)
  - [Alpha Releases](#alpha-releases)
  - [Beta Releases](#beta-releases)
    - [Branch Creation](#branch-creation)
  - [Release Candidates](#release-candidates)
  - [Official Stage and Release](#official-stage-and-release)
  - [Post-release Activities](#post-release-activities)
    - [Debian and RPM Packaging](#debian-and-rpm-packaging)
  - [Release Validation](#release-validation)
  - [Create CI/Presubmit jobs](#create-cipresubmit-jobs)
  - [Configure Merge Automation](#configure-merge-automation)
  - [Tide](#tide)
  - [Code Freeze](#code-freeze)
  - [Code Thaw](#code-thaw)
- [Branch Content Management](#branch-content-management)
  - [Branch Fast Forward](#branch-fast-forward)
  - [Reverts](#reverts)
  - [Cherry Picks](#cherry-picks)
- [Staging Repositories](#staging-repositories)
- [Debugging](#debugging)
- [References](#references)

> - [Background information](#background-information)

Author: This comes up in our reviews without fail and I keep forgetting to address it.
I use Visual Studio Code with two neat extensions:
- [Markdown All in One](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=yzhang.markdown-all-in-one)
- [markdownlint](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=DavidAnson.vscode-markdownlint)

The combination of the two enable linting for Markdown files and table of contents generation.
ToC generation happens on save, so I have limited control there.

I'm willing to give up some control there for the sake of the table of contents always being up to date.

> - [Background information](#background-information)

Reviewer: Does VSCode support "git add -i"?

   - e.g. For cycle v1.15 you're expected to allocate time to cut releases on the dates detailed on [sig-release/releases/release-1.15/README.md][release-1.15].
   The bulk of your time commitment is during release cut days.
2. You must allocate time to setup your system to run the release tools; eventually you'll have a routine going and become more familiar with the process.
3. Participate in weekly one hour release team meetings.
4. Run `./branchff` on a daily basis as soon as the release branch i.e. `release-x.y` [is created](#branch-creation). (Less than 45mins)
5. Your time commitment increases during code freeze (when approaching the official release), expect 3 or more 1 hour meetings in a week.
6. Select Associates and guide them in preparation to become the section lead for the next cycle.
7. Delegate tasks to the Associates (where applicable), so that they may exercise the release process.
8. Update this handbook where appropriate for the next release cycle.
9. Have willingness to accommodate with different timezone esp. for the release team and your Associates.

> 10. Participate in conversations that happen on [#sig-release] and [#release-management]

Author: A [good] side-effect of the plugins I use in VSCode. 
See here: https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/pull/757/files#r314089653

Builds against the `master` branch are implicitly the next alpha. `gcbmgr` and `anago` automatically finds and increments the current build number.

## Beta Releases

### Branch Creation

During a `beta.0` release e.g., `1.16.0-beta.0`, our release tooling creates a new release branch named `release-x.y`, where `x` and `y` are the major and minor versions of the next release, respectively.

Behind the scenes `anago` is doing a branch create and push.

> `prow`’s [`branchprotector`](https://git.k8s.io/test-infra/prow/cmd/branchprotector/README.md) runs once per day and automatically adds [branch protection](https://help.github.com/articles/about-protected-branches/) to any new branch in the `k/k` repo.

Reviewer 2: nit: would be better to explicitly spell out `k/k` to `kubernetes/kubernetes` since newcomers also read the handbook :)

New release branch creation (for example: `release-1.16`) also automatically triggers an alpha.0 build for the subsequent release (for example: [`v1.17.0-alpha.0`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases/tag/v1.17.0-alpha.0)).

**n.b.** This means that the staging step will take about twice as long, as it will stage both versions `v1.16.0-beta.0` and `v1.17.0-alpha.0`. The release step will also be extended, but not substantially longer in time.

---

Builds against a `release-x.y` branch are implicitly a next beta. `gcbmgr` and `anago` automatically finds and increments the current build number. The command example below is to stage a build for a beta release:

`./gcbmgr stage release-1.16 --build-at-head --nomock`

This being the first build from the newly created release branch, the publication of this build does not send out the typical changelog detail notification, but rather will only send a shorter message with subject line "[k8s release-1.15 branch has been created](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/kubernetes-announce/Gu2JYa4BzAg)".

To publish (release) the build artifacts from staging beta for example, run:

> `./gcbmgr release release-1.16 --buildversion=v1.16.0-alpha.3.N+commit-hash --nomock`

Author: I pretty much only touch versions when I've passed over a section... as if to say, "Someone has looked over this recently-ish.". I don't necessarily want to do wholesale search/replaces and have them in a separate commit if I haven't personally reviewed the section.

> `./gcbmgr release release-1.16 --buildversion=v1.16.0-alpha.3.N+commit-hash --nomock`

Reviewer 3: I'm fine saying solving this is out of scope for this PR, but I agree re: increased review burden.  There are also a lot of `x.y` references in this doc, and it'd be cool to just pick one up top and stick with it. eg: "for the purposes of this doc, the last release is 1.1, the in-development release is 1.2, and the not-yet-started release is 1.3" (eg: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/b7f39f6935264984e24fe8c27c0fd8e4fffac364/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md#conformance-test-version-skew-policy)

When the new `release-x.y` branch is created, it marks the beginning of another stage in the release process.

The following tasks should take place as soon as possible:

1. Update the [Slack branch whitelist](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/89e6e9743b74a646ca883c21a127773e8eb35e7d/prow/plugins.yaml#L211-L230) ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13869)):
   - Find the current branch whitelist config ([`prow/plugins.yaml`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/prow/plugins.yaml), grep for `branch_whitelist:`)
   - Remove the oldest release branch block e.g., `release-1.12`
   - Add an entry for the newest release branch e.g., `release-1.16`
   - Add all current [Patch Release Team members](/release-managers.md#patch-release-team) to all `kubernetes/kubernetes` release branches
   - Remove [Branch Managers](/release-managers.md#branch-managers) from any previous release branches
   - Add all current [Branch Managers](/release-managers.md#branch-managers)
2. [Create CI/Presubmit jobs for the new release](#create-cipresubmit-jobs)

> 3. [Run `./branchff` approximately a day after the branch has been created]((#branch-fast-forward))

Reviewer 2: IIUC anyone who'll need to run `branchff` needs to be in the `release-managers` GitHub team? Can we also mention that in the Onboarding section?

Author: We mention this in the beginning of the `Branch Content Management` section.
I'm planning to [refactor this doc a bunch and have more guidance on Release Engineering onboarding in the repo](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/issues/695#issuecomment-505762265), but I'm going to punt on that for this PR.

To better prepare and see what to expect, this is a sequence of events that took place on past [official release days](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1K0B91lgeEiJTbT602VloA5arb6AkaTif-MLryaHmlYc/edit?usp=sharing).

## Post-release Activities

- Set the `K8S_RELEASE` marker for the current release variant to `stable-x.y` in the [`variants.yaml` file for `kubekins-e2e`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/fa43d4a7a6c88c0dedd0db83b250cec485b60736/images/kubekins-e2e/variants.yaml). ([reference PR review comment](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13870#discussion_r313628808))

> 

Reviewer: (ie: there seemed to be a fair amount of confusion or uncertainty on what the marker's intent is...that decided should be in official docs for reference as in 3/6/9/12 months we'll be wondering again and again and we'll have fresh issue and PR discussions to reference)

1. The build tag and release artifacts become [visible on GitHub at https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases)

> 2. The release is logged automatically by [k8s-release-robot](https://github.com/k8s-release-robot) in [sig-release](https://github.com/k8s-release-robot/sig-release)

Reviewer 2: Bad link for sig-release .. :grimacing:

3. CHANGELOG-X.Y.md is automatically loaded into the kubernetes/kubernetes repo: [https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG-1.12.md](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG-1.12.md)

---

## Create CI/Presubmit jobs

This takes place around week 6-7, as soon as the new [`release-x.y` branch is created](#branch-creation).

1. Clone the [test-infra repository](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra) e.g., `git clone git@github.com:kubernetes/test-infra.git`

2. [Install Bazel](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/install.html)

3. Update [`images/kubekins-e2e/variants.yaml`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/images/kubekins-e2e/variants.yaml). ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13876))

>    (The `variants.yaml` allows us to target various branches or branch combinations during CI tests. The `K8S_VERSION` variable maps to the version marker files viewable in the [`kubernetes-release` GCS bucket](https://gcsweb.k8s.io/gcs/kubernetes-release/release/) e.g., [`latest-1.16.txt`](https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/latest-1.16.txt))

Reviewer: This is good, but it's now a great summary buried where only a subset of relevant folks will see it.  IMO should be in https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/docs/kubernetes-versions.md

   - Remove the oldest release variant e.g., `'1.12'`
   - Add an entry for the newest release variant e.g., `'1.16'`
   - Ensure the following:

>      - The `K8S_RELEASE` marker for `experimental` matches `master`

Reviewer 2: Can we also mention that this needs to be `stable` or is that still under discussion? If the latter, should we create an issue to track this?

Reviewer: And output the issue's outcome into https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/docs/kubernetes-versions.md

>      - The `K8S_RELEASE` marker for the newest release variant is `latest-x.y`

Reviewer 2: Once we get a "stable" release of, say 1.16, should we change this to `stable-1.16`?

Author: There's already a note added for this in the `Post-release Activities` section.

     - The `K8S_RELEASE` marker for every other release variant is `stable-x.y`

   Here's an example of a correct (as of time of writing (`1.16.0-beta.0`)) [`variants.yaml` for `kubekins-e2e`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/fa43d4a7a6c88c0dedd0db83b250cec485b60736/images/kubekins-e2e/variants.yaml):

   ```yaml
   variants:
      experimental:
         CONFIG: experimental
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.28.1
         UPGRADE_DOCKER: 'true'
      master:
         CONFIG: master
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.16':
         CONFIG: '1.16'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: latest-1.16
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.15':
         CONFIG: '1.15'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.15
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.14':
         CONFIG: '1.14'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.5
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.14
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.21.0
      '1.13':
         CONFIG: '1.13'
         GO_VERSION: 1.11.5
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.13
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.18.1

> 

Reviewer: Again this mixes style "s/^/  /" with content "stable" and/or "latest" -> "stable-1.1[0-9]" but not for master and experimental.  Confusingly masking.

Author: The original example here needed updating:
- incorrect indentation
- newer golang versions
- kubernetes version markers were off

I reference a [PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13876) which has a rich diff of what changed for guidance.

   # Note that the last block i.e., the `1.12` block was removed
   ```

4. Create a PR with this change and wait for it to be merged. ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13876))

   **Wait for the `test-infra-push-kubekins-e2e` presubmit to finish (you can [check on prow](https://prow.k8s.io/?job=post-test-infra-push-kubekins-e2e)).**

   **Pull latest from `master` before continuing.**

5. Generate the new release branch jobs:

   ```shell
   bazel run //experiment:prepare_release_branch
   ```

6. Search for and update jobs that must be manually bumped

   `grep` for [`manual-release-bump-required`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/search?q=manual-release-bump-required&unscoped_q=manual-release-bump-required) in [test-infra](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra) and duplicate block entries appropriately

> 7. Update release dashboards in [`testgrid/config.yaml`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/testgrid/config.yaml) ([example commit](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882/commits/8aad58b09ae718139b44c70512d2d133d094ed82))

Reviewer 2: config.yaml link does not exist

   - Remove the oldest release `sig-release-<version>-{master,informing,all}` dashboards e.g., `sig-release-1.12-all`

>    - Add dashboards for the current release e.g., `sig-release-1.16-{master,informing,all}`

Reviewer: This is mildly messy in practice and might warrant a link to an example PR from a past remove/add cycle.

Author: The beginning of this step already references a commit which illustrates the dashboard changes: https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882/commits/8aad58b09ae718139b44c70512d2d133d094ed82

(This is probably much simpler than it previously was because the jobs/dashboard/testgroup relationship has been moved to annotations within the job configs themselves.)

8. Check for and resolve configuration errors ([example commit](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882/commits/867e9ee0329228c6c79399dc67097d0f94814f8f)):

   ```shell
   bazel test //testgrid/cmd/configurator/...
   ```

   **Known issues**
   - [`pull-kubernetes-{dependencies,verify}` jobs need to be manually forked](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/13886) ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13885))
   - [Several gke/gce/gci jobs are misconfigured for sig-release-x.y-all dashboards](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/13883)

9. Enable/update the `milestoneapplier` plugin configs for the following repos ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13888)):
    - `kubernetes/enhancements`
      - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `1.16`
    - `kubernetes/kubernetes`
      - Remove config oldest release branch
      - Add config for the current release branch

>       - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `1.16`

Reviewer 2: s/1.16/v1.16 everywhere in this section and

- Instead of `master`, `release-1.16` should be configured to `v1.16` (master would have been configured in the previous release)
- After code freeze is lifted, `master` should be configured to `v1.17`

Author: Yep, keeping the reference to `master` for continuity (in case it wasn't done in the previous cycle) e.g., 1.16 is [the first time we're doing it for new release branches](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13885).

Author: Added a note about post-code freeze.

     - The `K8S_RELEASE` marker for every other release variant is `stable-x.y`

   Here's an example of a correct (as of time of writing (`1.16.0-beta.0`)) [`variants.yaml` for `kubekins-e2e`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/fa43d4a7a6c88c0dedd0db83b250cec485b60736/images/kubekins-e2e/variants.yaml):

   ```yaml
   variants:
      experimental:
         CONFIG: experimental
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.28.1
         UPGRADE_DOCKER: 'true'
      master:
         CONFIG: master
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.16':
         CONFIG: '1.16'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: latest-1.16
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.15':
         CONFIG: '1.15'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.7
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.15
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.23.2
      '1.14':
         CONFIG: '1.14'
         GO_VERSION: 1.12.5
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.14
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.21.0
      '1.13':
         CONFIG: '1.13'
         GO_VERSION: 1.11.5
         K8S_RELEASE: stable-1.13
         BAZEL_VERSION: 0.18.1

> 

Reviewer 3: this whole yaml block being present here scares me, way too easy to drift out of date

   # Note that the last block i.e., the `1.12` block was removed
   ```

4. Create a PR with this change and wait for it to be merged. ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13876))

   **Wait for the `test-infra-push-kubekins-e2e` presubmit to finish (you can [check on prow](https://prow.k8s.io/?job=post-test-infra-push-kubekins-e2e)).**

   **Pull latest from `master` before continuing.**

5. Generate the new release branch jobs:

   ```shell
   bazel run //experiment:prepare_release_branch
   ```

6. Search for and update jobs that must be manually bumped

>    `grep` for [`manual-release-bump-required`](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/search?q=manual-release-bump-required&unscoped_q=manual-release-bump-required) in [test-infra](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra) and duplicate block entries appropriately

Reviewer 3: do we have an issue for removing the toil for these jobs?

> 7. Update release dashboards in the [Testgrid config](https://git.k8s.io/test-infra/config/testgrids/config.yaml) ([example commit](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882/commits/8aad58b09ae718139b44c70512d2d133d094ed82))

Reviewer 3: an idea for followup: shard out to `config/testgrids/sig-release/config.yaml` instead (ref: https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/13541)

   - Remove the oldest release `sig-release-<version>-{master,informing,all}` dashboards e.g., `sig-release-1.12-all`
   - Add dashboards for the current release e.g., `sig-release-1.16-{master,informing,all}`

8. Check for and resolve configuration errors ([example commit](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882/commits/867e9ee0329228c6c79399dc67097d0f94814f8f)):

   ```shell

>    bazel test //testgrid/cmd/configurator/...

Reviewer 3: Ugh why do we not have a single target for this...

You'll want to use `//config/...` to pickup prowjob tests, also where we intend to move testgrid config tests (ref: https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/issues/13690)

And `//hack:verify-config` will catch more things, like generated jobs, prow config changes, etc.
```suggestion
   bazel test //config/... //testgrid/... //hack:verify-config
```

9. Enable/update the `milestoneapplier` plugin configs for the following repos ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13888)):
    - `kubernetes/enhancements`
      - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `v1.16`
    - `kubernetes/kubernetes`
      - Remove config oldest release branch
      - Add config for the current release branch
      - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `v1.16`
    - `kubernetes/release`
      - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `v1.16`
    - `kubernetes/sig-release`
      - Update config for `master` to current milestone e.g., `v1.16`

   **Known issues**
   - Once the handbook includes sections that explicitly dictate timeline, we need to mention that after Code Freeze we need to update the `kubernetes/kubernetes` config for `master` to next milestone e.g., `v1.17`.

10. Update [kubernetes-versions.md](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/blob/master/docs/kubernetes-versions.md)

11. Regenerate job configs:

    ```shell
    hack/update-config.sh
    ```

12. Do a final check for configuration errors:

    ```shell

>     bazel test //testgrid/cmd/configurator/...

Reviewer 3: Same here
```suggestion
   bazel test //config/... //testgrid/... //hack:verify-config
```

    ```

13. Issue a PR with the new release branch job configurations ([example PR](https://github.com/kubernetes/test-infra/pull/13882))

14. Once the PR has merged, verify that the new dashboards have been created and are populated with jobs:
    - https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-1.16-all
    - https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-1.16-blocking
    - https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-1.16-informing

15. [Announce in #sig-release and #release-management](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C2C40FMNF/p1565746110248300?thread_ts=1565701466.241200&cid=C2C40FMNF) that this work has been completed

[sig-release-1.Y-blocking]: https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-release-1.15-blocking
[`branchff`]: https://git.k8s.io/release/branchff

## Configure Merge Automation

Starting release cycle v1.16, branch management will take on duties from the Test Infra lead. Since the role was dissolved at the end of cycle v1.15. This section describes the added responsibility that branch management will partake:

> Between the Code Freeze and lifting Code Freeze (or Code Thaw) period, merging new code is restricted (focus is on fixing existing code and getting green test builds on Testgrid) and is implemented by a combination of prow plugins config, submit-queue config, and [tide]. The `master` and current release cycle branch i.e. release-x.y are the only branches affected during this period.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we change any plugin configs to enforce anything since 1.14 onward when we dropped code slush as a concept, and we *_super definitely_* don't use the submit queue 👻 anymore
```suggestion
Between the Code Freeze and lifting Code Freeze (or Code Thaw) period, merging new code is restricted (focus is on fixing existing code and getting green test builds on Testgrid) and is implemented by config changes for [tide]. The `master` and current release cycle branch i.e. release-x.y are the only branches affected during this period.
```
